.. ----------------------------------------------------------------
   SUNDIALS Copyright Start
   Copyright (c) 2002-2022, Lawrence Livermore National Security
   and Southern Methodist University.
   All rights reserved.

   See the top-level LICENSE and NOTICE files for details.

   SPDX-License-Identifier: BSD-3-Clause
   SUNDIALS Copyright End
   ----------------------------------------------------------------

.. _ARKODE.Usage.MRIStep.Resizing:

MRIStep system resize function
-------------------------------------

For simulations involving changes to the number of equations and
unknowns in the ODE system (e.g. when using spatially-adaptive
PDE simulations under a method-of-lines approach), the MRIStep
integrator may be "resized" between *slow* integration steps, through calls
to the :c:func:`MRIStepResize()` function. This function modifies
MRIStep's internal memory structures to use the new problem size.

To aid in the vector resize operation, the user can supply a vector
resize function that will take as input a vector with the previous
size, and transform it in-place to return a corresponding vector of
the new size.  If this function (of type :c:func:`ARKVecResizeFn()`)
is not supplied (i.e., is set to ``NULL``), then all existing vectors
internal to MRIStep will be destroyed and re-cloned from the new input
vector.


.. c:function:: int MRIStepResize(void* arkode_mem, N_Vector yR, realtype tR, ARKVecResizeFn resize, void* resize_data)

   Re-initializes MRIStep with a different state vector.

   **Arguments:**

   * *arkode_mem* -- pointer to the MRIStep memory block.

   * *yR* -- the newly-sized solution vector, holding the current
     dependent variable values :math:`y(t_R)`.

   * *tR* -- the current value of the independent variable
     :math:`t_R` (this must be consistent with *yR*).

   * *resize* -- the user-supplied vector resize function (of type
     :c:func:`ARKVecResizeFn()`.

   * *resize_data* -- the user-supplied data structure to be passed
     to *resize* when modifying internal MRIStep vectors.

   **Return value:**

   * *ARK_SUCCESS* if successful

   * *ARK_MEM_NULL*  if the MRIStep memory was ``NULL``

   * *ARK_NO_MALLOC* if *arkode_mem* was not allocated.

   * *ARK_ILL_INPUT* if an argument has an illegal value.

   **Notes:** If an error occurred, :c:func:`MRIStepResize()` also sends an error
   message to the error handler function.



Resizing the absolute tolerance array
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If using array-valued absolute tolerances, the absolute tolerance
vector will be invalid after the call to :c:func:`MRIStepResize()`, so
the new absolute tolerance vector should be re-set **following** each
call to :c:func:`MRIStepResize()` through a new call to
:c:func:`MRIStepSVtolerances()`.

If scalar-valued tolerances or a tolerance function was specified
through either :c:func:`MRIStepSStolerances()` or
:c:func:`MRIStepWFtolerances()`, then these will remain valid and no
further action is necessary.


.. note:: For an example showing usage of the similar
          :c:func:`ARKStepResize()` routine, see the supplied serial C
          example problem, ``ark_heat1D_adapt.c``.
